DUNE: Chapter Two Thoughts
==========================

And so we continue with the reading of *Dune.*


The Opening Quote
-----------------
It sets up the Harkonnens and Paul as necessary opposites: no truth
without falsehood, no light without dark. Again, this is from Irulan,
so it's an open question how this is supposed to be taken. In the last
chapter I think it called attention to Maud'Dib being created by the
Reverend Mother's test, or at least it points out that Muad'Dib is not
purely a creation of Arrakis. If that's correct, then the read here is
that the Harkonnens aren't the opposite of Paul.

A read of it could be that Muad'Dib is just Paul's version of the
excesses of the Harkonnens, but we'll see.


Introduction of the Harkonnens
------------------------------
Piter is introduced as having an "effeminate face." His voice tenor,
musical, sweet.

Vladimir has a very, very expensive globe of a very, very desolate
place.

The first thought from the Baron is him thinking he should kill Piter
soon. The first thought from Feyd is impatience. We don't see any
thoughts from Piter.

There is a disagreement between Piter and the Baron over the inclusion
of Feyd-Rautha in the plans. Why? Is one of them wrong, and therefore
being shown to be foolish? Or, is Piter just objecting to being put on
display for Feyd-Rautha and using objections about Feyd's age as a
cover?

Kanly, the type of duel that will end the book, is introduced here,
with Leto's letter threatening to invoke it against the Baron. Leto
also refuses to meet with the Baron due to past treachery.

Piter is described as a "Mentat assassin." This seems an odd use of the
term assassin. While it's not impossible Piter directly murders people
for the Baron, he seems much more like a majordomo or executor. This is
also later true of Thufir Hawat. Yet, effectively, they both are
responsible for both executing plans that assassinate rivals and for
preventing those types of attacks against the House they serve.

Piter talks too much. At the end of the book, Paul will comment that
Feyd-Rautha talks too much. The Baron brought Feyd-Rautha here to
learn from Piter's manner, and he points out that the Metat talks too
much. The lesson here may be about that as much as it is about why you
want someone like Piter and how to control him.

The Baron points to the human bodies of Metats being their weakness.
More shades of animal/human?

Almost the entire plan is laid out here, including the treachery of
Dr. Huey. That's an interesting choice. Leaving the plan ambiguous
would have allowed for a question as to whether Jessica was the true
traitor, building tension. Instead, we're told what the plan is so we
know that the Atreides are falling into the trap.

We've also been told by Jessica and the Baron that Leto know he's
walking into a trap.

Is this pointing to the locked-in nature of prescience? As a larger
theme, that's supposed to be the big problem. If the future is seen it
cannot be escaped. To be prescient is to be dead. As a message from the
book, it seems rather pointless. Unless the author things prescience is
truly a thing that is possible, then warning about it is pointless.
And while it's possible that Herbert thought this sort of prescience is
possible, it seems unlikely that is what he's really talking about.
Prescience isn't prescience. So, what is it standing in for?

Is prescience only possible because people limit themselves based on
what they believe to be possible? Everyone speaks as though there is
no alternative to the Atreides walking into this trap. Are we supposed
to believe that's wrong, and that Leto is foolish for doing so? If so,
we've not yet been shown any viable options that he declined because
he limited himself. However, it's possible it's coming.

There is lots of use of deviance from 20th gender and sexual norms to
paint the Harkonnens as decadent and evil. At least, that seems to be
the intent with things like Piter mincing and the Baron calling Feyd-
Rautha "darling." The question is whether this is just shorthand or
if this is part of the message of the author. There are echoes of
common explanations of the fall of the Roman Empire here, so I suspect
it's part of the message.


Conclusion
----------
The Harkonnens are set of as sexual and moral deviants, and the opening
quote invites us to see similarities between Paul and the Harkonnens.
In fact, we'll eventually learn he is a Harkonnen. We're also given the
Harkonnen's plan, so we can watch it unfold. What all we are to do with
this is still not certain. This is just chapter two, after all.

I am reminded of the theme of "cities bad, barbarians good" from Robert E.
Howard's *Conan, the Barbarian* books. Both also have an appealing
pulpiness to them.

It's probably a good point to bring up my objections to the narrative
that decadence is what led to the fall of the Roman Empire. First, while
I am a fan of the giant projects that are possible within a large
governmentally and economically entwined group, I view nations and
empires as just ways of describing a state of affairs rather than
a thing with it's own life and value. As often pointed out, the Roman
Empire only fell in 432 if you chose to define your terms that way.
The Byzantines continued the empire for another thousand years. So,
this type of narrative of "the Fall of Rome" seems forced.

That decadence led to the Fall seems more like an answer searching for
a problem than an honest appraisal of history and human behavior. When
people who dislike decadence look at the sack of Rome, they mysteriously
discover that it was decadence that brought down the Empire. Of course,
they tend to be trying to decry things they view as decadence within
modern society, and therefore "the Fall of Rome" is a warning to us
today of what will happen if we don't straighten up and follow the
writer's rules for clean living, which likely involve more farm labor
for people other than the writer and an end to homosexuality.

It may be true that the excesses made possible by the enormous
productivity of our current age may have down sides. Certainly it
would be good if we were in more control of our impact on the climate
of the planet, for example. However, the simplicity of life after "the
Fall" isn't some return to virtuousness. It's a consequence of the
economic collapse that comes from the restriction of travel and trade
when the large administrative apparatus that made such things possible
breaks down.

If the book understands the problems with the animal/human distinction
the Bene Gesserit make, then it's possible it understands the problems
with its portrayal of the Harkonnens. If it does, then there is still
the possibility of something interesting being said. While I have my
doubts, I'll still continue on.
