DUNE: Chapter Ten Thoughts
==========================

We made it to the double digit chapters. Only thirty eight and five
more books to go.


The Opening Quote
-----------------
What had the Lady Jessica to sustain her in her time of trial? A
vague proverb that sort of points to the journey being in the steps,
itself a vague proverb for something like the systemic thinking
from the previous chapters.

It's not as clear how this is going to interact with the following
chapter.


The Weirding Room
-----------------

    And there were ways to open any palm lock—as she had learned at school.

    --Lady Jessica thinking about the oval door

Here, let us train you how to break into places before we sell you to
a Duke. Yeah, I'm not going to get over that. It'd be one thing if she
were a courtisan. She wasn't employed. She was sold. And as we see,
she is bitter about the fact he never married her.

Mapes hates the weirding room. It's little surprise. It wastes a lot of
water. Though, again, are there no comets in this system? I suppose the
Harkonnens were actively terrible to the people. But, you'd think that
eventually, wet planet conservatories could be a wider spread thing. I
suppose that's sort of what eventually happens. It just feels a little
weird to have interstellar travel and have one of the most common
molecules in the universe so difficult to find.

Our sun isn't yellow. It's white. That's why white is white. I suppose
the filter glass could be diffusing the light to make the sky look blue,
leading to a yellower looking sun. Still the sun isn't yellow.

Count Fenring lived in this house before the Atreides did. He does come
back up at the end of the book as being a not-quite-Kwisatz-Haderach.
I'm not sure his presence in this house is particularly relevant for
that, though.

Why is Lady Fenring warning Jessica about the traitor? Lady Fenring
is also a Bene Gesserit, so maybe there is sorority there. Actually,
who are the Bene Gesserit we know so far:

*   Jessica (concubine of Duke Leto)
*   The Reverend Mother (aide to the Emperor)
*   Irulan (daughter of the Emperor)
*   Wanna (wife of Dr. Yueh [deceased])
*   Margot (wife of Count Fenring)

So, the Bene Gesserit seem to be attached to the Atreides and the
Corrino households, and not so much the Harkonnens. That said, Jessica
is the daughter of the Baron Harkonnen, so there has to be some sort
of connection there.

How connected are members of the Bene Gesserit to the organization of
the Bene Gesserit? They seem to be expected to sleep with whoever the
overall group wants them too, so it would seem like there is a lot of
control. Still, Jessica disobeyed without direct consequence as far as
we are told, and Wanna dies without Jessica knowing. Both suggest a
looser organization. It seems likely to be like a monastic order with
its own internal politics and factions. Though, if true, we aren't
seeing much of them in comparison to the Imperial politics we are
getting.

The room was designed to attract Paul. Though, if the bedroom attracts
Paul, the wet-world conservatory will super attract Paul and Jessica.
That puts a bit of a different spin on the note. Perhaps this is a
trap that is more subtle than the hunter-seeker, meant to ensnare
Lady Jessica rather than Paul? It does sort of work out that way.
Still, I have my doubts.

Maybe the Bene Gesserit work for the best outcome for each other within
the plan? Information sharing would be a necessary part of that. They
pass information to each other, trusting they're working towards a
common goal? Though, honestly, the easiest and probably best explanation
is probably empathy. Margot is just trying to prevent a sister's
suffering the best that she can.

Jessica is hurt that Leto hasn't married her. She understands why he
hasn't. That doesn't mean it doesn't hurt. Maybe the Old Duke had
convinced his son not to marry Jessica? Or it's just the Old Duke part
of Leto that keeps him from marrying her. That would explain her
animosity towards the Old Duke.

Regarding the missed assassin who was bricked up in the cellar: the
defenders have to be right all the time. The attackers just need to be
right once.

The possibility that the warning about a traitor is just an attempt to
sow chaos is a good one to consider. Obviously, we know there is a
traitor, but neither Jessica nor Paul should be so certain. At some
point, you do have to trust.

Dr. Yueh is rejected because he's not a companion or a lieutenant, so
the partial information in the letter from Margot does lead them a bit
astray.

I suppose the light signals were used because either:

*   They thought the Atreides were too business looking at the
    communications net to notice signals over a different medium.
*   They wanted the Atreides to see them, increasing their worry
    about attack.

Those are opposing possibilities, but I'm not sure which is right.
I sort of like the second option, though.


Conclusion
----------
The main big question I'm left with is:

*   Why did Margot warn Jessica if she was married to Count Fenring?
